update(blog)!: Privacy is Also Protecting the Data of Others (#2931)
privacyguides/privacyguides.org: blog/posts/the-privacy-of-others.md

---
date:
    created: 2025-03-10T20:00:00Z
categories:
    - Opinion
authors:
    - em
description: In privacy, we talk a lot about how to protect our own data, but what about our responsibility to protect the data of others? If you care about privacy rights, you must also care for the data of the people around you. Together, we must start building a culture of data privacy where everyone cares for the data of others.
schema_type: OpinionNewsArticle
---
# Privacy is Also Protecting the Data of Others

![Illustration from a photo of two children standing in a grass field. The taller child holds a yellow umbrella protecting the smaller child.](../assets/images/the-privacy-of-others/cover.webp)

<small aria-hidden="true">Illustration: Em / Privacy Guides | Photo: J W / Unsplash</small>

> In privacy, we talk a lot about how to protect our own data, but what about our responsibility to protect the data of others?
> 
> If you care about privacy rights, you must also care for the data of the people around you. To make privacy work, we need to develop a culture that normalizes caring for everyone's data, not just our own. Privacy cannot solely be a personal responsibility, data privacy is team work.<!-- more -->
> 
> Whatever measures and tools you use to protect your own data, you would never be able to protect it fully without the collaboration of the people around you.
> 
> In this context, the people around you might be your family or your friends, but also includes your boss, your doctor, your therapist, your school, your government, and any other person or organization that has control over some of your data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In privacy, we talk a lot about how to protect our own data, but what about our responsibility to protect the data of others?

If you care about privacy rights, you must also care for the data of the people around you. To make privacy work, we need to develop a culture that normalizes caring for everyone's data, not just our own. Privacy cannot solely be a personal responsibility, data privacy is team work.<!-- more -->

Whatever measures and tools you use to protect your own data, you would never be able to protect it fully without the collaboration of others.

In this context, the people around you might be your family or your friends, but also includes your boss, your doctor, your therapist, your school, your government, and any other person or organization that has control over some of your data.
```

Just for variation instead of saying "the people around you" thrice in a row.

Conversely, you are also in control of other people's data.

Even if you are not a boss, a doctor, or a therapist yourself, you probably have some photos of your friends, a list of contact information, and copies of sensitive conversations exchanged in private messages with your family. All of this data is under your guard too.

Once you have control over someone else's data, **you become its guardian**.

## Data protection is a communal responsibility

> Now to be clear, this isn't necessarily in relationship with the law, although it can be part of it. In this context, I am referring more to ethics. What are our moral obligations to care for others and to protect others at least to the same level we wish to be protected ourselves.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now to be clear, this isn't necessarily in relationship with the law, although it can be part of it. In this context, I am referring more to ethics. Do we have a moral obligation to care for and protect others to at least the same level we wish to be protected ourselves?
```

This is a confusing sentence to me. I'm not sure if restructuring it as a question like this keeps the same intention you had, but I think this question is adequately answered by the paragraphs below so it works.

As a connected society, we constantly exchange information with each other. This information is now mostly stored on digital mediums, and can be very easily duplicated and shared elsewhere. Actually, on a technical level, it's even *difficult* not to constantly involuntarily create duplicates of this data and send it elsewhere.

This is why **we must increase our vigilance** about protecting the data of others.

Considering the quantity of data that ends up in everyone's possession, data has become a communal responsibility.

## We must develop a culture that normalizes data privacy

Privacy is a human right, and a good starting point to protect any human right is legislation. Legislation is undeniably an aspect of data privacy that is in constant evolution, and we can hope that privacy laws will only get better over time. Well, let's not just hope, let's also work to make sure it does.

That being said, **laws simply aren't enough**.

> To truly improve data privacy rights, we *must* integrate them into our *whole culture*. This might sound like an over-ambitious endeavor, but culture is flexible and evolves with people's needs. It always has.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To truly improve data privacy rights, we *must* integrate them into our *whole culture*. This might sound like an over-ambitious endeavor, but culture is flexible and evolves with people's needs.
```

> Our culture and customs have partly shifted *against* data privacy in the past decades. Some of us are old enough to remember a time when everyone didn't have a camera in their pocket. At that time, it would have been considered unacceptable in most places to suddenly point a recording camera at a stranger in the street and start filming them without any explanation and without their consent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the past few decades, our culture and customs have begun to shift *against* data privacy. Some of us are old enough to remember a time when everyone didn't have a camera in their pocket. At that time, it would have been considered unacceptable in most places to suddenly point a recording camera at a stranger in the street and start filming them without any explanation and without their consent.
```

Now this kind of disrespectful behavior is a common occurrence, because everyone has the tool do to it. Our society evolved with technological tools, but **we neglected to course-correct our culture for it**.

We have reached a point where we need to develop a culture of individual responsibility towards each other's data.

This means caring not just for our own data, but **caring for everyone's data**, whether it's the data of our friends, our family, our employees, our patients, or even complete strangers in the streets, or online.

> This will take time and a lot of efforts, but we owe it to the next generations to start now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will take a lot of time and effort, but we owe it to the next generations to start now.
```

## The principles we should consider in relation to privacy

Our society already has adopted or improved many ethical principles in the past decades that are intimately linked to data privacy.

Some of these principles and values have become much more prevalent in our culture recently, consent being one great example for this.

> **Consent** in privacy is incredibly important. What someone might feel comfortable sharing publicly might be completely different from another person, for example. Privacy cannot be established on a fixed basis without considering individuality and circumstances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Consent** in privacy is incredibly important. What one person might feel comfortable sharing publicly might be completely different from another person, for example. Privacy cannot be established on a fixed basis without considering individuality and circumstances.
```

For clarity I like doing either "one person" and "another person" _or_ doing "someone" and "someone else" -- not mixing the two.

> Someone might be happy sharing their name on social media, and someone else might safeguard this information and only use pseudonyms. Someone might feel safe sharing their home address online, yet another person could get killed for doing this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Someone might be happy sharing their name on social media, and someone else might safeguard this information and only use pseudonyms. One person might feel safe sharing their home address online, yet another person could be killed for doing this.
```

First sentence is a perfect example of previous comment :)

Also, both _be killed_ and _get killed_ are technically correct I think, but _get killed_ sounds accidental to me.

This is why *informed* and *explicit* individual consent (with true choices) should always be the center of such decisions, for any type of personal information.

Other principles we must integrate in our culture of data privacy include **empathy** (my threat model isn't your threat model), **trust and respect** (secure this data properly if you must collect it), **safety** (consider someone could get severely harmed by a data breach), and **individual liberties** (sharing data must be a personal choice, even if there's no danger, it's still valid even if it's just a preference).

> Of course, this is only a few principles indispensable to build a culture of data privacy. But since most people are already familiar with these, let's start here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, these are only a few principles indispensable to build a culture of data privacy, but since most people are already familiar with these we'll start here.
```

> ## Practices we can all adopt right now to start building a better culture around data privacy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How we can start building a better culture around data privacy
```

Can we shorten this?

> So, what concrete actions can we take *right now* to improve our culture around data privacy. What can we do today at the individual level to start better protecting the data of others?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, what concrete actions can we take *right now* to improve our culture around data privacy? What can we do today at the individual level to start better protecting the data of others?
```

> Here are a few practices you can adopt in your daily life to improve the data of the people around you. But I insist, do not just demand others do this for you, also **do this for others**. It needs to start with ourselves:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are a few practices you can adopt in your daily life to improve the data of the people around you. However, I insist you not just demand others do this for you, but **do this for others too**. Re-shaping our culture needs to start with ourselves:
```

Can we define what "it" is here? (just a pet peeve of mine)

### :material-camera-off: Ask for consent before sharing/posting photos

Do not post photos of people online without their prior consent. Especially if there are children involved! Before sharing photos of others online, *always* ask for their consent first.

### :material-face-recognition: Be mindful when sharing photos of protests

> Be very careful when taking pictures during a protest. There's a lot of nuance to this because it's also important to show protests and make them known, that's usually the goal. But in some circumstances, people might be put in danger if their faces are showed online associated with certain causes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be very careful when [taking pictures during a protest](https://www.privacyguides.org/articles/2025/01/23/activists-guide-securing-your-smartphone/). There's a lot of nuance to this because it's also important to show protests and make them known (that's usually the goal!), but in some circumstances people might be put in danger if their faces are shown online associated with certain causes.
```

### :material-contacts: Safeguard contact information

Never share the contact information of someone with someone else (or something else) without their prior explicit consent. This includes email addresses, phone numbers, legal names, locations, photos, and *especially* home addresses. This information in the wrong hands could literally get someone killed. **Always ask first!**

Additionally, be vigilant when importing your contact list in a new application. This could get it shared further than you intended. Ideally, always keep your contact list in an end-to-end encrypted application only.

### :material-file-eye: Be careful when sharing files from and with others

If someone trusted you with a file (photo, music, video, PDF, text file, etc.), always ask for consent before sharing this file with someone else.

> Additionally, always keep this file only locally or stored in a secure end-to-end encrypted service. If this person gives you consent to share this file, ensure that [metadata](https://www.privacyguides.org/en/data-redaction/) has been removed from it. This person might not be aware of the metadata on this file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, always keep this file only locally or stored in a secure end-to-end encrypted service. If this person gives you consent to share this file, ensure that metadata has been [removed](https://www.privacyguides.org/en/data-redaction/) from it. This person might not be aware of the metadata on this file.
```

I like the links on verbs when linking to guides, and on nouns when linking to overviews

### :material-heart: Keep confidences secret

If someone trusts you enough to share something personal with you, do not betray that trust by talking about it with someone else, and *especially* not on unencrypted services such as Gmail or Twitter's DM. In doing so, you would expose this secret to even more unintended recipients. Respect people's trust in you. Do not share confidences.

### :material-message-text: Safeguard and delete private messages on social media

> If you have private conversations on social media, be mindful not to spread this information elsewhere. If you delete your account, be mindful to also [delete](https://docs.cyd.social/docs/x/delete#delete-my-direct-messages) the information of others you have stored in your private messages. If someone wants to share sensitive information with you, always invite them to move to an end-to-end encrypted [messaging service](https://www.privacyguides.org/en/real-time-communication/) instead.

Reviewer: This is a great example of the comment I just left above :)

Author: Excellent! I will take note of this for the future, thank you :)

### :material-heart-box: Safeguard and delete intimate pictures you received

> If someone trust you enough to send you intimate photos of themselves, take this responsibility *extremely* seriously. If they use an end-to-end encrypted service, do not move the photos out of there. If you do, you could inadvertently upload them in an unencrypted service and compromise the security of these pictures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If someone trust you enough to send you intimate photos of themselves, take this responsibility *extremely* seriously. If they use an end-to-end encrypted service, do not move the photos out of there. If you do, you could inadvertently upload them to an unencrypted service and compromise the security of these pictures.
```
